The Project Gutenberg eBook of El Morro Trails, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: El Morro Trails
       El Morro National Monument, New Mexico

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 21, 2021 [eBook #65891]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EL MORRO TRAILS ***




                           _El Morro Trails_
                 EL MORRO NATIONAL MONUMENT, NEW MEXICO


                           PRICE: 50 CENTS IF YOU TAKE THIS BOOKLET HOME

    [Illustration: _Inscription Rock, El Morro National Monument_]




                              Introduction


In the year 1540, Francisco Vasquez de Coronado came up from Mexico with
some 350 Spanish soldiers and crossed southeastern Arizona to Zuñi, a
pueblo 30 miles west of El Morro. Breaking up into several groups, they
went eastward 70 miles to Acoma Pueblo and thence to the Rio Grande. At
least one of the groups probably passed El Morro enroute.

The first known historical mention of El Morro is found in the journal
of Diego Pérez de Luxán, chronicler of the Espejo expedition of 1583.
Luxán stopped here for water on March 11 of that year.

For some 300 years, hundreds of Spanish soldiers and priests, enroute
between Santa Fe and Zuñi, and the Hopi villages farther north, passed
El Morro. Many left names and notations about themselves carved into the
soft sandstone.

After 1849, American soldiers, emigrants, freighters, and adventurers
camped here because of the never-failing waterhole. In 1906, El Morro
was set aside as a National Monument and additional name carving was
prohibited.

The name “El Morro” simply means “the headland” or “the bluff,” and
refers to the appearance of this mesa-point from a distance.

                         KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL




                           _El Morro Trails_




                         INSCRIPTION ROCK TRAIL


The trail begins directly behind the Monument headquarters, and climbs
gradually toward the rock. Just follow the arrows and _do not hurry_. It
is 7,200 feet above sea level here, and the altitude may bother some of
you. The hike past the inscriptions and back to the office normally
takes from 30 to 40 minutes.

After viewing the inscriptions, you may, if you wish, continue up over
the top of the rock and visit two large prehistoric Indian ruins. This
extra hike will take you another 1 to 1½ hours.

Starting near the base of the mesa the trail has been marked with
numbered stations which match the numbered paragraphs in this booklet.
Read and enjoy yourself as you walk.

No one has ever been bitten here, but watch along the path for
rattlesnakes.

           Please leave the Monument as neat as you found it.


1.   If you look closely at the rock, about 12 feet above the ground,
you will see some notches cut into the sandstone. These are footholds.
Probably most Indians came to the pool by the long, safe way, but
others, caring more for their thirst than their lives, came down from
the mesa top through the high notch to the right and above you.

  Do not, under any circumstances, try coming down this short way—the
  rock is extremely slippery. If you go to the top, stay on the marked
                                 trail.


2.   Now you see why travelers stopped here. There is no spring; the
pool is fed largely by rain falling in July, August, and September, and
by melting snows. When full it is about 12 feet deep and holds about
200,000 gallons of water.

                  DO NOT THROW ANYTHING INTO THE POOL!

If you look closely around the walls at about eye level, even on the far
side, you can see names carved into the rock. Most of these date from
1850 to 1900, and were the work of emigrants and soldiers.

How did they get over there? In the early days, there was probably a
sandbank around the edge, and people could ride or walk around the pool.
In 1942, a heavy rock fall filled the waterhole. When the sand and
rubble were removed, the old dam was reinforced and lined with concrete.

  Do not write or carve on the cliff, and please don’t touch. Touching
  the inscriptions causes them to wear away more rapidly.

The mud formations on the face of the rock above the pool are the nests
of cliff swallows. These birds come to El Morro each year to nest and
raise their young.

    [Illustration: _The waterhole_]


3.   Along the base of the mesa are examples of the predominant types of
trees found in the Southwest. From left to right these are:

  (1) One-seed juniper (_Juniperus monosperma_), which can be used for
  fenceposts and fuel.

  (2) Pinyon pine (_Pinus edulis_), noted for its edible nuts which are
  harvested in the fall.

  (3) Ponderosa pine (_Pinus ponderosa_), which provides excellent wood
  for construction and building purposes.

Watch for black sage (_Artemisia tridentata_) along the right side of
the trail. This is the purple sage of western fiction and is recognized
by the silvery down on the leaves and the purplish color of the shaggy
bark. The strong aromatic odor of sagebrush is especially noticeable
after a rain.


4.   In the desert varnish, the darker colored rock, note particularly a
sequence showing hand prints, foot prints and a zig-zag trail going to a
hole in the cliff. This could mean, “Follow the hand and foot trail to
the pool of water.”

The signature of Mr. Long is the most impressive one on the rock. It
appears to have been carved between 1850 and 1862, probably with a knife
after being sketched. Just to your right around the corner, note “Mr.
Engle” in block print and “Mr. Bryn” in script. Engle was Beale’s
second-in-command and Long and Bryn were members of Beale’s company.


5.   There is a good account of Mr. P. (Peachy) Gilmer Breckinridge from
the Virginia Historical Society. He graduated from Virginia Military
Institute, and as a young man rode across the continent to California.

In 1857 Lt. Edward Beale was in charge of an expedition testing camels
for use in the American deserts. Breckinridge was in charge of the 25
camels used by Beale when they passed El Morro.

Remaining there only a short time, he rode back to Virginia just in time
to get into the Civil War. He was killed in a skirmish at Kennon’s
Landing, Virginia, in 1863.

    [Illustration: _E. Pen Long inscription_]


6.   Here you observe a number of very faint Spanish inscriptions which
have never been completely studied. Note the word “año” (year) 1646. To
the right is a lamp-blackened inscription reading “paso por aqui Miguel
Alfaro.” (Passed by here, Miguel Alfaro). A date is not given, nor is
the man yet known to us. Scholars, dating the inscriptions by letter
style, say it was done about 1700.

The round black discs along the bottom of the rock are section markers.
Each one is lettered and they divide the face of the cliff into sections
so the inscriptions can be easily located and recorded.


7.   In Spanish, this inscription says: “A veinticinco del mes de junio,
año de 1709 paso por aqui para Zuñi—Ramon Garcia Jurado.” Translated, it
reads:

  “On the 25th of the month of June, of this year of 1709, passed by
  here on the way to Zuñi—Ramon Garcia Jurado.”

    [Illustration: _Ramon Garcia Jurado inscription, 1709_]

You can find Señor Jurado’s name in old Spanish documents. In 1728 he
was the “alcalde mayor” of the Keres district, not far south of Santa
Fe.

To your right is a blackened inscription which reads, translated, “By
here passed Pedro Romero on the 22nd of August, year of 1751.” Little is
known about this Spanish gentleman.


8.   “By here passed Andres Romero, of the year 1774.” This Spaniard is
unknown. The date is important because it is apparently the last Spanish
inscription before the coming of the Americans in 1849.


9.   Notice the petroglyphs here, in particular the four mountain sheep
and what appears to be a bear paw. These are, of course, far older than
the Spanish inscriptions above them.

The Spanish inscription reads:

  “Pasamos por aquí el Sargento Mayor y el Capitan Jude de Archuleta y
  el Ayudante Diego Martin Barba y el Alferez Agustin de Ynojos año de
  1636.”

Translated, it reads:

  “We passed by here, the Sergeant Major and Captain Juan de Archuleta
  and Adjutant Diego Martin Barba and Ensign Agustin de Ynojos, the year
  of 1636.”

The “Sergeant Major” was not an enlisted man, as now—he was the officer
in direct command of the troops. The ensign was the standard bearer,
corresponding in grade to a second lieutenant.

Barba and Archuleta were accused of aiding a rebellion during one of the
numerous civil disturbances that plagued the Spanish in New Mexico. In
1643 they were beheaded.


10.   Here is the oldest and most famous inscription at El Morro. It was
done by the first governor of New Mexico, Don Juan de Oñate, in 1605, 15
years before the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth Rock.

In 1604, Oñate rode south with 30 men to the Gulf of California. On his
return the next year, he made his inscription, which reads:

  “Paso por aquí el adelantado Don Juan de Oñate del descubrimiento de
  la mar del sur a 16 de Abril de 1605.”

The translation reads:

  “Passed by here the Governor Don Juan de Oñate, from the discovery of
  the Sea of the South on the 16th of April, 1605.”

By “Sea of the South,” Oñate meant Gulf of California, an arm of the
Pacific Ocean. He was not the first Spaniard to see it, of course.

This was not Oñate’s first visit to El Morro—on December 13, 1598, he
passed here from Zuñi with a group of Spanish soldiers, enroute to the
Rio Grande via Acoma.

    [Illustration: _Juan de Oñate inscription. 1605_]

Below the Oñate inscription, partly hidden by the yucca plant, is an
inscription that reads:

  “By here passed the Ensign Don Joseph de Payba Basconzelos, the year
  he brought the cabildo of the realm at his own expense the 18th of
  February, of the year 1726.”

What Basconzelos actually meant is not clear to us.


11.   Continuing along the cliff, among the many inscriptions and
petroglyphs you will be able to locate a church, stars, crucifixes, a
little cavalry guidon (flag) and the prominent inscription of R. H.
Orton, who was the Adjutant-General of California after the Civil War.
You may also be able to locate the names of Simpson and Kern (but more
about them at post #21.) The Indian Petroglyphs are higher on the rock
because, through the centuries, erosion lowered the ground level.


12.   Begin here with the highest set of inscriptions. The ground level
was higher then, as shown by this tree, which surely did not begin
growing on top of a mound! Done by one of New Mexico’s most famous
frontier governors, this inscription reads:

  “Aqui estuvo de General Don Diego de Vargas, quien conquisto a nuestra
  Santa Fe y a la Real Corona todo el Nuevo Mexico a su costa, Año de
  1692.”

or:

  “Here was the General Don Diego de Vargas, who conquered for our Holy
  Faith, and for the Royal Crown, all of New Mexico at his own expense,
  year of 1692.”

Twelve years earlier, in 1680, the Pueblo (Indian) revolt had taken
place. Many Spanish were killed and the remainder fled to El Paso. In
1692, de Vargas returned to re-establish Spanish control of the pueblos.
He was later imprisoned for 3 years in the governor’s palace and when
released, restored as governor. He died in Bernalillo in 1704.

Below the de Vargas inscription are three names, “Williamson,”
“Holland,” and “John Udell,” all with the same date of 1858. These men
were members of the first emigrant train to try this new route to
California.

A good account of the trip can be found in the _Journal of John Udell_,
a Baptist preacher who, with his 64-year-old wife, decided to visit his
children in Sacramento. The party, consisting of 40 families and their
equipment, finally reached the Colorado River, only to be attacked by
the Mojave Indians. Several of the group were killed and practically all
of their equipment stolen or burned.

The survivors, including the elderly Udell and wife, returned to
Albuquerque, walking most of the way. They passed El Morro enroute,
arriving in Albuquerque, nearly starved, in November 1858. Remaining
there for the winter, Udell and some of the others again started for
California in 1859 in the company of Lt. Edward F. Beale, famous for his
camel caravan of 1858, which also came west by way of El Morro.

They had no difficulty reaching California, and finding their children
in Sacramento. Mr. Udell is known to have died in the Golden State, a
very old man.


13.   The first emigrant train (mentioned in station 12) was led by Mr.
L. J. Rose. He was born in Germany and moved to New Orleans in 1830. He
later moved to Iowa where he became wealthy in the dry goods business.

Rose was wounded by Mojave Indians in the attack mentioned by Udell.
After recovering from his wounds he went to Los Angeles and became one
of its leading citizens.


14.   Some of the high carvings have the letters “U. P. R.” written
after them. In 1868, the Union Pacific Railroad ran a survey through
here, but the project was never carried out. The development of the
Santa Fe Railroad 25 miles to the north effectively ended the use of El
Morro as a stopping place.

There is good reason to believe that practically all of the names you
see here on the point date _after_ 1850.

Looking west along the rock, you will note that the inscriptions end
about where the small juniper is growing. Probably the rough surface
beyond the little tree discouraged carving.

But don’t stop here! Some of the best of the early Spanish inscriptions
await you up the path.


15.   Slightly to your left, several miles away, is a multi-colored
mesa. It is composed of the same material as El Morro, was formed about
the same time, and is approximately the same height. The brighter colors
are caused by thin films of iron oxide around the sand grains, which are
not conspicuously present in El Morro. Lack of water kept the early
travelers from stopping there.


16.   As the saying goes, the writer of this inscription “counted his
chickens before they hatched.” He tells us:

  “Year of 1716 on the 26th of August passed by here Don Feliz Martinez,
  Governor and Captain General of this realm to the reduction and
  conquest of the Moqui (Hopi) and (in his company?) the reverend Father
  Friar Antonio Camargo, Custodian and ecclesiastical judge.”

    [Illustration: _Don Feliz Martinez inscription, 1716_]

Governor Martinez found the Hopis unwilling to accept Spanish
domination, and after about 2 months of quarreling, (mostly with words
and fist-shaking) the expedition returned, quite unsuccessful, to Santa
Fe.

Now continue on up to the next landing.


17.   Because they were written on the same day and seemingly in the
same handwriting, we presume that this inscription and the one to the
west were written by the same man. The first one says:

  “The 28th day of September of 1737, arrived here the Bachelor Don Juan
  Ignacio of Arrasain.”

The second reads:

  “The 28th day of September of 1737, arrived here the illustrious Señor
  Don Martin de Elizacochea, Bishop of Durango, and the day following,
  went on to Zuñi.”

The good “Bachelor” was a Bachelor of Laws, not necessarily a single
man. The event records one of the first visits to this territory by a
Bishop from Durango, Mexico.

    [Illustration: _Don Martin de Elizacochea inscription, 1737_]

    [Illustration: _Don Francisco Manuel de Silva Niéto Poem, 1629_]


18.   Inscriptions on the north side are difficult to photograph,
because the sun shines around here only a couple of hours per day during
the summer. Here is the only poem on the rock:

  “Aqui (llego el Señor) y Gobernor
  Don Francisco Manuel de Silva Nieto
  Que lo imposible tiene ya subjeto
  Su brazo indubitable y su valor
  Con los carros del Rey Nuestro Señor
  Cosa Que solo el puso en este efecto
  De Agostos 5 (Mil) Seiscientos Veinte Nueve
  Que se Bien a Zuñi pasa y la Fe lleve.”

The poem, of course does not rhyme when translated into English.

  “Here arrived the Señor and Governor
  Don Francisco Manuel de Silva Nieto
  Whose indubitable arm and valor
  Have overcome the impossible
  With the wagons of the King our Lord
  A thing which he alone put into this effect
  August 5, 1629 that one may well to Zuñi
  pass and carry the faith.”


19.   If you are an enlisted man, you’ll appreciate this one. The first
two lines of the inscription read:

  “The 14th day of July 1736 passed by here the General Juan Paez
  Hurtado, Inspector.”

The second two lines, no doubt added when the good general’s back was
turned, read:

  “And in his company, the Corporal Joseph Trujillo!”

We wonder what ever happened to Corporal Trujillo!


20.   You are now looking at the longest and one of the most interesting
inscriptions on the rock, supposedly done by Governor Eulate:

  “I am the captain General of the Providence of New Mexico for the King
  our Lord, passed by here on the return from the pueblos of Zuñi on the
  29th of July the year 1620, and put them at peace at their humble
  petition, they asking favor as vassals of his Majesty and promising
  anew their obedience, all of which he did, with clemency, zeal, and
  prudence, as a most Christian-like (gentleman) extraordinary and
  gallant soldier of enduring and praised memory.”

The word crossed out appears to have been “gentleman.” Somebody who knew
the old boy apparently took exception to all this highflown praise.
(That the erasure was done before 1849 can be proved, see Simpson,
next).


21.   Lt. J. H. Simpson, an engineer for the army, and Mr. R. H. Kern, a
Philadelphia artist who rode around with the army drawing pictures, were
the first English-speaking people to make a record of Inscription Rock.

    [Illustration: _Eulate inscription, 1620_]

    [Illustration: _Simpson and Kern inscription, 1849_]

They spent 2 days copying the inscriptions, and stated that when they
were here, not a single English inscription could be found on the rock.

Recall the word “gentleman” crossed out back at Stake No. 20? Mr. Kern’s
drawing faithfully shows the word X’d out just as you saw it.

The Spanish inscription below was done by one of three Spanish soldiers
left to “guard” 2,000 Zuñi Indians in 1699. It reads:

  “I am of the hand (that is, written by) of Felipe de Arellano on the
  16th of September, soldier.”

In 1700, the Zuñis apparently thought the odds in their favor were good,
so they killed the three Spaniards.

To the right of Arellano’s inscription is a marvel of Spanish
“shorthand.” A good scholar translated it for us. Here it is in both
Spanish and English:

  “Se pasaron a 23 de marzo de 1632 años a la venganza de muerte del
  Padre Letrado.—Lujan”

The translation reads:

  “They passed on the 23rd of March, 1632, to the avenging of the death
  of the Father Letrado.—Lujan”

About the year 1629, Father Letrado built the earliest mission chapel at
what we call today Salinas National Monument (near Mountainair, New
Mexico, southwest of Albuquerque).

He was transferred to Zuñi in February of 1632 and was killed just a
week later. On hearing the news in Santa Fe, Lujan and a party of
soldiers reached Zuñi in remarkably fast time.

    [Illustration: _Lujan inscription, 1632_]

This is the end of the inscription part of our trail. You may retrace
your steps back to headquarters, or, if you wish, you may continue your
hike on up over the mesa top, past the ruins, and down to headquarters
by the return trail on the other side.

                        Please stay on the trail




                 TRAIL TO THE TOP OF THE ROCK AND RUINS


The first stake is some distance along the trail, so keep walking and
watch for it.


1.   The cave-like depressions in the side of the rock are created by
water. Rain falling on the top of the mesa enters cracks in the rock,
runs down the cracks (called joints), and comes out of small openings on
the side of the mesa. The water seeping out of the opening gradually
wears away the rock. The freezing of the water in winter and thawing in
summer helps to weaken the sandstone.

The tall trees in the vicinity of this stake are ponderosa pine (_Pinus
ponderosa_). They are readily identified by the needles, which grow two
or three to a cluster. These trees grow in well-watered, protected areas
within the Monument. The larger ones are somewhere between 200 and 300
years old.


2.   Here you can stop and catch your breath before beginning the steep
climb. Look at the top of the mesa, to your right, just below the
railing. You can see very clearly two different formations of rock. The
lower is the sandstone called Zuñi formation and the higher is the
Dakota formation. The line between these two formations represents a
time interval of between 25 and 30 million years. More about this later.

Behind the numbered stake near the base of the rock, you will see a
Gambel oak (_Quercus gambelii_). It is commonly associated with
ponderosa pine and is the most abundant oak of the low mountains and
plateaus of the Southwest. It is characterized by its deeply-lobed
leaves, and its habit of growth. It ranges from a shrub to a tree in
size, and is often seen in dense stands, which give it the name of
“scrub” oak in certain localities. Deer and livestock browse this tree,
and small animals use its acorns for food.


3.   The policy of the National Park Service is to keep the parks
looking as natural as possible. Since it is natural for dead trees to be
in a forest the ones you see in this area will not be cleaned up. When a
tree falls in a National Park Service area it will lie where it fell and
eventually will decay and supply nourishment for future trees.


4.   Take a break here and look at the valley between the multicolored
mesa and the higher parts of the Zuñi Mountains. This valley was formed
by water gradually wearing away the softer rocks of the Chinle
formation. The harder sandstones of El Morro and the adjacent mesa on
the southwest and the sandstones and limestones of the higher slopes
resisted such erosion.

During the last few million years, while the Zuñi Mountains were being
gradually pushed up to their present height, more than 10,000 feet of
sedimentary rocks have been removed from what you see. This has been
done by running water and wind, carrying away the rocks a few particles
at a time. Before that, about 100 million years ago, this entire area,
as far as you can see in any direction, was under the water of an
ancient ocean. Forty million years before that, the sands of El Morro
were accumulating on a broad, desert-like plain, built up by sand
deposition of sluggish, wandering streams, and re-sorted by wind into
large dunes.

Before continuing along the trail, you will notice many small trees
around you which are called pinyon (_Pinus edulis_). These pine trees
have two needles to a cluster and are never tall like the ponderosa
pine. They are usually less than 35 feet in height, and have a rounded,
compact crown. Pinyons are seldom found growing in pure stands but are
associated with various kinds of juniper. Because of the nature of their
growth, heavy stands of pinyon and juniper are often called pigmy
forests. The pinyon produces edible nuts which are abundantly used by
local residents as well as marketed commercially elsewhere in the United
States.


5.   Here you can see at close hand the difference between the dark,
upper layers of ocean sands and the light color of the lower and earlier
stream and dune sands. Look here at the cliff above you and a little to
the right. The lower is Zuñi sandstone, of the Jurassic period, and
forms the bulk of El Morro. The upper is Dakota sandstone of Cretaceous
period, representing beach deposits of the ancient sea which covered all
the area. The contact surface between these two units represents a time
interval of between 25 and 50 million years when erosion instead of new
deposition was taking place.


6.   Look on the left side of the trail and a little behind you. You
will see a dark green stake that marks one of the four corners of the
unexcavated ruin. Let your eye follow along the top of the incline to
your right and you will see another green stake, another corner. As you
follow the trail on this side of the box canyon, look to your left for
the last two stakes and you can tell how big this ruin is. Please do not
leave the trail.

This village was possibly two or three stories high, but after the
Indians left, the roofs collapsed and the walls fell in. Then the sand
blew in, weeds began to grow, and you see the result.


7.   Looking at the cliff wall across this little box canyon, you can
see a definite horizontal line about half way down. The materials above
and below the line were laid down about the same time, but the line
represents a layer of softer material which has weathered away faster.

The reason for the unevenness is that stream channels cut into the
underlying sandstone, and then, as the land slowly settled to allow the
sea to encroach, the channels filled up with sand. The sands were
reworked by waves on the beach and the tops smoothed out and leveled.
Small lagoons and swampy areas formed along the coastline. As you climb
the steps at No. 11, you will cross a small seam of coal-like material
which was formed from one of these swamps.

    [Illustration: _The geological disconformity described at Stake 7._]

If you look across the box canyon, on the horizon you will see the ruins
of another village. It was occupied about the same time as the one on
this side of the mesa.

Across the top of the mesa, the trail will be marked with two parallel
lines. Please stay between the lines.

                           STAY ON THE TRAIL


8.   The boulders of mixed colors topping the pedestals of Zuñi
sandstone are the Basal Conglomerate of the Dakota formation. This
involved erosion and reworking of the old surface (Zuñi) plus the
deposition of new materials. Thus some of the light colored particles in
the Dakota are Zuñi sandstone.

The steps cut in the rock were constructed by the National Park Service.
They are not the work of prehistoric Indians.


9.   The line, to the left of the post, extending through the rock on
both sides of the mesa, is one of the principal causes of the
development of the box canyon. After El Morro was buried by several
thousand feet of younger rocks, some 60 million years ago, it was
subjected to great pressures from the weight of the overlying rocks and
the movements which caused the Zuñi Mountains to project so far above
sea level. These pressures caused the sandstone to crack into the long
openings which we call joints. As running water and wind gradually
removed the overlying rocks, the waters were able to run down into the
joints and, alternately freezing and thawing, broke up the rock into
small fragments which could be washed away.

If you stand on this line and look down the box canyon to the west, you
can see that each steep canyon wall is simply one side of a joint, while
the material on the other side has been eroded away. If you look
eastward towards the headquarters area, along this joint line, you can
see how El Morro maintains its vertical walls by breaking into blocks
which fall away from the main mass of the sandstone and leave a vertical
joint face. This joint line is different from the others which you may
have noticed in climbing over the rock because it goes so far and cuts
through the rock so deeply.


10.   The dark colored splotches are lichens. A lichen is composed of
two different organisms, an alga and a fungus, living together and
supporting each other. The fungus furnishes the moisture for the alga,
and the alga the food for the fungus. This coexistence is known as
symbiosis.

As you walk from No. 10 to 11, you will pass several potholes that
become pools of water after a rain. Some of these were artificially
enlarged by the Indians who lived on the mesa top, to serve as
supplementary sources of water.


11.   The dark color here is caused by carbonized remains from the
plants which grew in the ancient swamps. Coal is formed in much the same
way, but there is too much inorganic material in this seam to produce
coal. This is the coal-like seam mentioned at No. 7. On the very top,
the dirt is from the Mancos formation of Cretaceous age, and is composed
of marine shales deposited in the ancient sea which covered the area. It
was originally much thicker, and is younger than any of the other rocks
exposed here.

Immediately ahead and extending to the right for nearly 300 feet is the
ruin called _Atsinna_, a Zuñi word referring to the “writing on rock.”


12.   Atsinna, the larger of the two ruins, is approximately 200 by 300
feet, the size of some city blocks. Like the other village, parts of it
probably were three stories high, mainly along the north side. It was
terraced down toward the south, thus providing a southern exposure. You
are standing on the second floor level about ten feet above the original
ground level. The first floor was filled with debris from the collapse
of the upper stories.

The Indians obtained most of their water from the pool at the base of
the rock, as did the later Spanish and American travelers, but they also
caught as much water as they could on the mesa top.


13.   This round room, is called a _kiva_. Kivas were built primarily
for religious ceremonial reasons, but had other purposes, just as the
large halls in cities today are used for exhibits, concerts, lectures,
and other activities. In addition to religion, these rooms were used for
workrooms, playrooms, general meeting places, fraternal society
meetings, etc.

    [Illustration: _A portion of Atsinna. Part of the square kiva is
    shown at lower left_]

Now contrast this round kiva with the square kiva across the trail
toward the northeast. Both kivas served the same functions, but they
represent two different architectural styles or traditions in use at
approximately the same time.

    [Illustration: _The box canyon as seen from its eastern end looking
    west_]

    [Illustration: _Looking out over Inscription Rock from the south_]

Atsinna was occupied during the 13th and 14th centuries. The reason for
the abandonment of this site is not definitely known. Perhaps the
Indians found that the growing seasons were too short at this elevation
and they had too many crop failures. Apparently these people moved to
the west, where they founded the several Zuñi villages known in historic
times. There, around the present pueblo of Zuñi, the growing season is
slightly longer and irrigation can be practiced, and possibly the soil
is more fertile.

The prominent peak on the horizon to the south is called _Cerro Alto_,
which is Spanish for high mountain. This peak is a volcanic cinder cone.


14.   The stones you see at this station were used for grinding corn
after it had been dried and stored. The corn was placed on the large
stone called _metate_ and ground with the smaller stone called _mano_.


15.   The trail now descends from the mesa top back to the Monument
headquarters. We hope that you have enjoyed your trip over Inscription
Rock. Should you have any questions, the ranger on duty will be happy to
be of assistance.


       PUBLISHED IN COOPERATION WITH THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE BY
               SOUTHWEST PARKS AND MONUMENTS ASSOCIATION
                            221 NORTH COURT
                         TUCSON, ARIZONA 85701

    [Illustration: SOUTHWEST PARKS AND MONUMENTS ASSOCIATION • NATIONAL
    PARK SERVICE]

Southwest Parks and Monuments association was founded in 1938 to aid and
promote the educational and scientific activities of the National Park
Service. As a nonprofit organization authorized by Congress, it makes
interpretive material available to park visitors by sale or free
distribution. All net proceeds support the interpretive and research
programs of the National Park Service.

21st Edition—10M—8/92

    [Illustration: Back cover]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EL MORRO TRAILS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
